Why 'forever renters' are the new buzzword in Australia’s ongoing housing debate
By Lucia Stein and Kate Jones for Life Matters . 

Home ownership is a pervasive ideal in Australia.

Almost from the time we are born, we are told that "rent money is dead money" and "owning a house is a safe bet".

So it's perhaps unsurprising that we carry those attitudes into adulthood and dream of one day buying a home.


The problem is that these long-held beliefs now come at a considerable cost. 

In the 1970s, the median house price in Sydney was $18,700, while in Melbourne, it was $12,800.

The median price in the NSW capital now is $1,186,459 and in Melbourne it's $772,561, according to CoreLogic.

The result is that more Australian renters believe they will never own a home, either by choice or because they are priced out of the market.

"They're not able to save up that deposit [for example]," Adam Kerr, a financial advisor based in Adelaide, tells ABC Radio National's Life Matters.

"So in certain circumstances, the idea of home ownership just sadly isn't possible."
But buying property isn't just a goal, it's also widely seen as a long-term strategy to build wealth.

And if entering the market is no longer an option for some Australians, is it still possible to achieve financial security while renting?

Renting by choice
In the 18 months from May 2022, the Reserve Bank of Australia raised interest rates 13 times, a scenario few households anticipated as Australia attempted to tame rampant inflation after the COVID-19 pandemic.

Mortgage repayments rapidly increased, while real household disposable income per capita fell, leaving borrowers worse off.

Even as interest rates begin to decrease, a recent Four Corners investigation found many electorates across the country are still suffering from mortgage stress. This describes households with less than 5 per cent of their earnings left over after essentials.

And so, as Australians have been forced to make difficult financial decisions, some have decided to sell their homes and become "forever renters".

CoreLogic data found the number of homes that were resold in less than three years had jumped to 16 per cent last year, its highest level in at least a decade.

Other households are locked out of the market entirely because of house prices, or are renting by choice.

Dr Dorina Pojani, an associate professor in urban planning at the University of Queensland, is a self-described "forever renter".

Dorina Pojani says "forever renting" is often framed as a situation that should be avoided. (Supplied: Dorina Pojani)

"I have been renting for the past 10 years … ever since [my husband and I have] been in Australia," she says.

"Partly because I've rented myself [for] a long time, I think about issues affecting renters generally." 

Between 2011 and 2021, the proportion of people in the private rental market across Australia increased in all age brackets — from 20-year-olds to people aged 80 and above, according to the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute (AHURI).

AHURI says rental rates are expected to keep growing over the next 20 years, while overall home ownership is forecast to fall from 67 to 63 per cent.

Dr Pojani explains long-term renting can be a lifestyle choice, while some households prefer to avoid the drawbacks of owning property that doesn't feature in the glossy listings on real estate websites.

"[They may not be] wanting to deal with anything that home ownership entails, because you need to take care of the garden, need to pay property tax and all of that," she adds.

"Or it can be people … that don't want to stay in one place for very long."

But just as the financial situation of home owners can shift depending on where interest rates move, renters are subject to changing rental prices that can be hard to predict.

The toll of forever renting
Simone Opie is very familiar with the downsides of Australia's rental market after 30 years of renting.

Since her divorce two years ago, the unemployed 52-year-old has lived in share houses and spent six months at a women's shelter. This meant she had to pause studying her certificate IV in mental health peer work.

In January, she moved from Nowra to a nearby town just to secure a rental with a flatmate.

While she is grateful to have somewhere to live, nearly half of her Centrelink payments are going towards rent, leaving very little to spend on other basic necessities.

"I think for older renters, it's harder. You're kind of at the end of your work life, so if you've got work, it's usually part-time or low-value … [and] because you're older and your income is less [compared to] someone 10 years, 15 years younger than you, they're going to beat you every time," she says.

A new report from campaign group Everybody's Home has found that a single person needed a $130,000 income to comfortably afford the national weekly asking rent for a typical unit.

Currently two-thirds of 200,000 retired Australian households who rent privately live in poverty, according to a Grattan Institute report. That figure rises to almost 80 per cent for single retired women.

And at the other end of the spectrum, there is not a single property across Australia that's affordable for someone on youth allowance, a report from Anglicare Australia found last year.

Renters are also grappling with housing insecurity, fierce competition at a time of high rental costs and low vacancy rates, and costs to their mental health.


Dr Pojani says renters also suffer from stigma. This is partly because of a cultural belief that renting is only acceptable in the short-term.

"There's this sense that renters are second-class citizens, and to be a proper Australian citizen, you need to be a home owner," Dr Pojani says.

"That's ingrained in the culture, and that's very much a mentality from the early Australian settlement, when people could come here from overseas, like from England, [and] could grab some land."

No-fault evictions are another issue raised by renters in Australia. Simone recalls moving four times when she was living in Port Macquarie with her three children still in high school because of owners selling their house or wanting to move back in.

"You might not be at fault, but you still [have] to find a new place to live," she says.

The last two years of renting have been some of the worst, she says, because she is now "priced out of the actual rental market".


In the March quarter of 2024, a Domain report found asking rents for houses experienced their steepest quarterly gain in 17 years, jumping to new record highs in Australia's major cities.

That era of explosive rental growth appears to be easing slightly, but it still indicates long-term renting requires strategic financial planning.

Managing finances while renting long-term
For those privileged enough to be able to make financial assessments about their future, developing a plan that works is key.

The first step is usually setting aside a portion of income for a future nest egg.

"I would say if you are going to consider renting and not purchasing a property … adding to your superannuation wealth and also diversifying into alternative investments is a very wise thing to do," Mr Kerr says.

"You need to be creating that buffer for yourself if you haven't got that home to kind of call your own."

One woman tells ABC Radio National's Life Matters the money she would have spent on a mortgage is instead being invested in other ways, mainly in the share market.

"While we're renting, we're investing in a really diversified way," she says. 

"So we'll have a diversified investment portfolio that we're able to see grow, and I'll also invest aggressively into superannuation as well."

Over the last 30 years, Australian shares on average have returned 9.2 per cent per annum, according to Morningstar analysis. This is despite the fact that the share market also experiences short-term volatility, as recently evidenced by the recent stock market correction.

Mr Kerr says it's possible to build wealth through investments other than real estate.

It might also work out cheaper to rent than to buy a home depending on where you live, because of the additional costs incurred on top of a mortgage such as rates, maintenance and insurance. The difference could be saved or invested.

But Mr Kerr warns the calculations might be different in retirement when households no longer have employment income coming in and they need to factor in rent for the remainder of their lives.

"You do need to probably have a larger asset pool when you start that retirement journey," he says.

Lifelong renters set to retire in Australia will also need to account for other costs, such as moving and finding rentals in different phases of life.

"They really do struggle to find somewhere else [if they are evicted], and also times where they may need modifications to the rental property, which aren't being allowed by the landlord, and that can also make life very difficult," Mr Kerr says.

Ultimately, he says renters need to have a buffer and should consider the future tax implications of investments outside of property. For example, the sale of shares incurs a capital gains tax.


Pension access is another consideration for forever renters.

"If you are looking to access the government age pension, which, for a lot of people, is at age 67, your assets are tested … by the government," he says.

"Now your primary home, or your family home, is one of the few assets that isn't tested. It's an exempt asset.

"So for example, if you were to work really hard and build up a massive pool of shares and other wealth, there's a possibility that if you've done a very good job at doing that, it'll actually preclude you from being able to access the government age pension."

A sustainable future for forever renters?
Dr Pojani argues that as more Australians are locked out of the housing market or opt out of it by choice, we need to put better measures to protect renters in place.

Currently, rentals are regulated at a state and territory level, which means different rules around the country on things such as caps on rent rises and no-fault evictions.

Dr Pojani says improvements in these areas will help renters — such as the phasing out of no-fault evictions in some states.

"Right now, people can get evicted for just about anything," she adds.

"So that's number one, just protect renters from no-fault evictions."

Other improvements should include increasing the supply of rental units and the normalisation of long-term leases beyond 12 months, according to Dr Pojani.

"We need to make sure that both sides get a fair deal, tenants and landlords," she says.

Disclaimer: This article contains general information only. You should consider obtaining independent professional advice in relation to your particular circumstances.