Melbourne rental prices flatline, tenants could feel some reprieve in 2025
Sarah Petty

Updated 9 Jan 2025, 9:20am

The two-bedroom unit at 2/5 Savaris Court, Donvale can be leased for $550 a week.

Melbourne tenants have kicked off 2025 with rent surges appearing to have ended.

New PropTrack figures show the city’s median rental cost for a house has flatlined, sitting at $580 for a house and $550 for a unit as 2024 came to a close.

Increases earlier in the year led to an annual rent hike of just 3.8 per cent for the Victorian capital’s typical home, a massive improvement from the 19.6 per cent surge recorded in 2023.

PropTrack senior economist Paul Ryan said there were signs Melbourne’s rental market could improve as we moved further into 2025.

Despite the latest Australian Bureau of Statistics building approvals data showing a 12.9 per cent decline in new Victorian home starts in November, Mr Ryan said the city overall had done a much better job constructing homes in the last five years than the rest of the nation.

“It’s very clear that’s playing out in terms of both housing costs in terms of prices as well as rent,” he said.

51 Stafford St, Footscray can be leased for $575 a week.

The two-bedroom house is priced around Melbourne’s median rental price for house in December of $580 a week.

Mr Ryan said rental price growth would more likely come in line with income growth later in the year, though in January and February — the busiest time of year for rental turnover — there would probably be a slight uptick in values.

“Melbourne does have very affordable rentals compared with the rest of the nation,” he said.

“Demand and supply in Melbourne has kind of come back … similar to the balance that we saw before the pandemic.

“There’s a bit more balance towards tenants rather than towards landlords as we have seen over the past couple of years.”

But The Rent Fairy founder and rental advocate Sarah Elkordi said inquiries from tenants looking for help finding a rental in Melbourne had gone “through the roof” in the past 30 days.

“(Rentals are) still highly competitive and still highly overpriced,” Ms Elkordi said.

“We still have multiple, multiple clients who come through and are relocating to Melbourne.

“What their budget would have been even a year ago has had to increase in order for them to secure something.”

She added that single-income households were especially struggling because wages hadn’t grown in line with rental prices.

4/58 Gourlay St, Balaclava can be leased for $550 a week.

The two-bedroom apartment is available to lease for the same price as Melbourne’s median unit value in December.

Renters and Housing Union secretary Harry Millward said about 15 per cent of their members, who were largely based in Melbourne, were experiencing rental stress or spending more than 30 per cent of their income to pay their lease.

However, following a number of rental reforms proposed by the Victorian government towards the end of last year, including ending no-fault evictions, Mr Millward added that the slowing of rental prices proved governments could stand up to those profiting from the housing crisis.

“I don’t think we’re going to see a lot of long-term change while the vast majority of the housing market is market-driven,” he said.

“Victoria has the lowest amount of housing not driven by profit in Australia. It’s a pretty shameful statistic of only 2 per cent.”


