Melbourne suburbs under $1.3 million within 5km of the CBD

By Caroline Zielinski
May 31, 2025 — 5.00am

Some of Melbourne’s least expensive houses within 5km of the CBD may soon prove out of reach as experts predict interest rate cuts will start pushing up prices - and competition.

There are 15 suburbs in a 5km radius of Melbourne city with a median house price of $1.3 million or less.


These include Brunswick East at $1.3 million, Ascot Vale ($1.25 million) and North Melbourne ($1.24 million), Domain March quarter data shows.

The median house price in Footscray, Brunswick West and Maribyrnong was between $900,000 and $1 million, Flemington, Kensington, Coburg and Yarraville were $1.1 million or less.

This compares with more expensive inner suburbs such as Albert Park ($2.3 million) and Middle Park ($2,725,000).

Domain chief of research and economics Dr Nicola Powell said she’s already noticed the Melbourne market reacting to the recent cash rate reduction by the increase in buyer inquiries.

The Reserve Bank last week cut the cash rate to 3.85 per cent, its second cut this year.

“We’ve been seeing 10 per cent more inquiries coming through compared to this time last year,” she said. Much of it is being driven by locals, who Powell said are kick-starting the market after seeing “homes are starting to sell for better prices, and quicker”.

“Melbourne has been the weakest of all capital cities in the last five years, so buyers are now seeing the rate reduction placing more momentum into the market,” Powell said. “People want to buy at the low and sell at the peak – it’s human nature”.

Interstate and local investors are also sniffing around. Buxton Inner West’s real estate agent Matthew John has noticed a significant uptick in inquiries from investors.

“There are four times as many inquiries from investors, especially from interstate, than this time last year. Melbourne is more affordable to buy in than it was, and there’s a sense we’ll see Melbourne outstrip the capacity of other capital cities,” he said.

Elise Nemer from Jas Stephens Real Estate said buyers “capped out” from the Adelaide and Sydney markets are flocking to Melbourne to buy an investment property.

“We have a lot of buyers from Adelaide and Sydney renting there, but wanting to buy an investment here,” she said.

“There’s so much activity now, even in those higher ends up to $1.8 million.”

That’s not to say Melbourne is going to “roll into boom tine scenario,” Powell said. “What we’re likely to see is a better performance of the housing market relative to the last few years.”

Westpac economist Matthew Hassan was similarly cautious, and said while the rate cuts will remove “any restraint that’s been in the mix”, he doubts they will drive any “real acceleration” in the market.

“What we’re seeing is a cautious easing in response to diminished inflationary pressures ...it’s not like previous easing cycles, such as the back-to-back cuts we had to get policy to a stimulatory setting.”

Despite the caution, Hassan said that the two rate cuts have stabilised the Melbourne market following its weakest performance in the country.

“The interest rate cuts have had a discernible effect, particularly in the Sydney and Melbourne markets after seeing price spillage over the last 12 months,” he said.

Vendors are optimistic. Children’s musician and mother-of-two Georgina Tankcock, 38, and her husband Guy have recently put their quirky, two-bedroom Seddon house for sale through Nemer at Jas Stephens after leasing it out on Airbnb for three years.

The couple, who bought the house 10 years ago before having children, poured their heart into making the cottage their “perfect home”.


“We lived in it through COVID with two kids, and unfortunately, we outgrew it,” Tankcock said. “But we didn’t want to sell it at first because we love it so much, so it’s been sitting on Airbnb for three years while we’ve been renting a family home in Yarraville.”

But now, with the market in a better place, the Tankcocks have decided to sell and have set their sights on a family home in Yarraville.


“It’s a great time for buyers at the moment, but there is risk associated with it, especially in the price points we are looking at,” Tankcock said. “To get the big, beautiful home we want on the land size in this area, we have to look at something that is lovable but in need of some work.”

They are looking for a buyer who will appreciate their “quirky” home, which features a concrete outdoor bath, exposed brick and a bathroom sink placed into an old fireplace.


