DRAFT AFFORDABLE
HOUSING STRATEGY
2030
FOR PUBLIC CONSULTATION

PRIORITY ACTIONS AND POLICIES
1. Advocate for
mandatory inclusionary
Action:
1.1 Advocate to the Victorian Government for State-wide mandatory inclusionary
zoning.
2. Develop affordable
rental housing on City of
Melbourne land
Actions:
2.1 Commit a City of Melbourne owned site to deliver an affordable housing project in
the next five years.
2.2 Continue to work with other local Councils to establish opportunities for
affordable housing development, and consider ways to share resources to enable
affordable housing projects.
Policies:
I. On all future residential development on City of Melbourne owned land, we aim
to deliver up to 25 per cent of residential development as affordable housing.
Consideration will be given to accommodating greater than 25 per cent affordable
housing in urban renewal areas.
II. Consideration will be given to delivering affordable housing on commercial
developments and community facilities on City of Melbourne land.
3. Strengthen our internal
affordable housing
processes
Actions:
3.1 Develop an Affordable Housing planning policy for inclusion in the Melbourne
Planning Scheme. This planning tool should clearly outline when an affordable
housing contribution should be made, how the rate of affordable housing should be
calculated and what should be included in an affordable housing agreement.
3.2 Establish a special purpose entity to manage affordable housing contributions,
with potential to operate across local government boundaries.
3.3 Commit staff and budgetary resourcing to the ongoing delivery of affordable
housing outcomes.
3.4 Develop a centralised internal process for recording and assessing affordable
housing outcomes.
4. Advocate and partner for
affordable housing
Actions:
4.1 Advocate across all levels of government, the private sector and the broader
community to improve affordable housing outcomes.
4.2 Advocate to the Victorian and Australian Governments for the increased
investment and provision of social housing, with an emphasis on public housing.
4.3 Partner with the State and Federal Governments to identify surplus land for the
delivery of affordable housing in the City of Melbourne. This may include land that
is owned by government departments and entities such as Melbourne Water and
Victrack.
4.4 Use City of Melbourne events, public forums and media platforms to promote
greater awareness and understanding of affordable housing issues and alternative
housing models.

THE SCALE OF OPPORTUNITY
Draft Affordable Housing Strategy 29
Priority 1: Inclusionary zoning (10 per cent)
Approximately 4,980 new affordable homes
(includes ramp up period)
Priority 2: Develop affordable housing on
City of Melbourne land (up to 25 per cent)
Approximately 400 new affordable homes
Priority 3: Strengthen our internal
affordable housing processes
Approximately 150 affordable homes
(Greater policy certainty, faster planning
and negotiation processes, and better
negotiating skills within Council could
deliver an efficiency uplift enabling more
projects to be delivered.)
Our goal is to increase the supply
of appropriate and accessible
affordable rental housing within
City of Melbourne.
If implemented effectively and at scale, the proposed
priorities outlined in this strategy could deliver up to
5,530 new affordable homes by 203637. This would
leave a remaining shortfall of approximately 17,670
homes.
We recognise a shortfall of 17,670 affordable homes
may seem overwhelming. However, the problem is
not insurmountable. We will advocate and partner
across the sector and with other tiers of government
to find solutions that address this remaining shortfall.
Priority 4: Advocate and partner for
affordable housing
We will advocate and partner across the
sector and with other tiers of government
to find solutions that address the remaining
17,670 home shortfall.
36City of Melbourne analysis, 2020

1. ADVOCATE FOR MANDATORY
INCLUSIONARY ZONING
The City of Melbourne’s position on mandatory
inclusionary zoning is for it to be:
1. A minimum percentage introduced across all
of Victoria or only in metropolitan areas. The
percentage should be higher in appropriate
locations where this is justified.
2. Phased in to allow the property market to adjust
and incrementally increased over time to at least
10% by 2031.
3. Applied to multiple land use types including
residential, commercial and industrial land.
4. Calculated as an equivalent percentage of net
developable floor area.
5. Transferred at minimal cost to registered
Community Housing Organisation.
6. Owned and managed by registered Community
Housing Organisation.
7. Designed to be indistinguishable from private
market housing.
Actions:
1.1 Advocate to the Victorian Government for statewide mandatory inclusionary zoning.
30 melbourne.vic.gov.au
What are we proposing?
We support the introduction of state wide mandatory
inclusionary zoning (IZ) for affordable housing.
Mandatory IZ is a planning control which requires a
percentage of affordable dwellings to be provided within
new development. This approach embeds the cost of
providing affordable housing in the cost of the land and
provides policy certainty to developers.
Mandatory IZ is not currently available within the Victorian
Planning Provisions. Its adoption can only be enabled by the
Victorian Government. The City of Melbourne can advocate
for this change but is not able to implement mandatory IZ
independent of the Victorian Government.
Our preferred position is that dwellings are transferred
directly to a registered community housing organisation
(CHO) at minimal cost.
Where it is agreed that a direct contribution is not practical
or appropriate, developers should make a financial
contribution towards the delivery of affordable housing
in lieu of providing dwellings for this purpose in their
development.
The design of dwellings is an important part of the city’s
character and a cohesive community. Any dwelling
transferred to a CHO should be indistinguishable in
design to the other private market dwellings in the same
development.
The introduction of mandatory IZ should be phased in over
a period of time so that the market has adequate time to
adjust to the change. The implementation of mandatory IZ
will be supported by guidance to make decision-making
clear and consistent.
A.LAND ZONING
(by Local and State
Governments) e
ects land
prices and development
options.
B. SITE SELECTION
is influenced by zoning and planning
requirements. Development costs
are calculated prior to site purchase,
including the cost of any planning
requirements.
Introducing mandatory
inclusionary zoning creates
certainty around a
ordable
housing contribution
requirements and a level playing
field for developers.
Mandatory inclusionary zoning ties the
cost of a
ordable housing
contributions to land prices. The cost
of a
ordable housing contributions can
be calculated into development costs
and will influence the price a developer
is willing to pay for the land.
A developer commits to providing
the required amount of a
ordable
housing to an agreed housing
provider (or, where appropriate,
cash in lieu of physical housing) at
the planning permit stage.

Mandatory IZ will deliver new affordable housing to
the City of Melbourne. IZ is commonly used in capital
cities around the world and in Australia.
Mandatory IZ will be the most effective planning mechanism
for delivering new affordable homes in our municipality. In
particular, it is appropriate to require a higher percentage
in our urban renewal areas. Our modelling demonstrates
that the introduction of mandatory IZ, ramping up to a 10
per cent requirement by 2031, would enable approximately
4,980 affordable homes to be built in the City of Melbourne
by 2036.37
Further, the analysis determined that the market within
inner-metro Melbourne could feasibly support this 10 per
cent requirement without impacting the ability to meet the
wider housing needs of our future population.38
Mandatory IZ delivers a strong return on investment for
the community
As part of the strategy, the City of Melbourne commissioned
a cost benefit analysis of the mandatory IZ which balanced
costs such as dwelling construction costs, maintenance
and operating costs and a reduction in residual land value
against the offsetting benefits; including health cost
savings, reduced family violence, reduced cost of crime,
enhanced human capital, worker retention.
This analysis found that over a 20 year period, a 10 per cent
mandatory IZ requirement delivers $3 in community benefit
for every $1 spent.39
Mandatory IZ offers greater certainty of expectations
and consistency of application
The current voluntary framework and planning mechanisms
in the Melbourne Planning Scheme are delivering very
few affordable homes. In June 2018, legislative changes
were introduced to enable voluntary agreements with
landowners to provide affordable housing. This change
has had no measurable effect on the number of voluntary
agreements entered in to within the City of Melbourne.
Mandatory IZ offers greater certainty and clarity to
developers on the planning requirements and associated
costs tied to a piece of land. This establishes a level playing
field for the market and the cost of providing affordable
housing can be factored into the total cost of developing a
site.
The clarity is also likely to reduce planning delays and the
likelihood of VCAT appeals on both the developer and the
council’s behalf.
The community housing sector also benefit from the
increased certainty: it assists with planning, lobbying and
resource allocation.
How does mandatory inclusionary zoning affect
development feasibility?40
A developer’s decision to purchase land is influenced
by the residual land value (RLV). This is the amount that
a developer is willing to pay for a piece of land. RLV
is equal to the total sale value of property that can be
developed, less the developer’s required profit and the
costs of construction.
Where affordable housing is required to be delivered,
construction costs are increased. Consequently the
RLV, that is the amount that a developer is willing to
pay for the land, is reduced as their costs increase. Over
time, the land absorbs the cost of affordable housing
through a reduction in its value. Provided that the value
of developing the land remains higher than the value
derived from the land’s current use, development will
still occur. 
