Victoria’s Housing
Statement
Progress Update
Victoria is number one in Australia
for approving and building homes.
52,854 homes have been approved in Victoria
over the last year – almost 10,000 more than
in New South Wales – despite challenging
economic conditions across the country.
That’s 145 new homes ready to start construction,
every day.
Almost 10,000 social and affordable homes are
under construction or completed through the
Big Housing Build, with more to come.
Additionally, almost 10,000 homes have been
fast-tracked for development in the last 12 months,
and we’re targeting more development in 10
built-up areas to support 60,000 more homes.
We have delivered more than 130 reforms
to strengthen renters’ rights – and as we speak,
our Rental Taskforce is cracking down on dodgy
rental providers.
Communities and stakeholders have had their
say on our $1 billion investment to build 1,300 new
homes in regional Victoria, including a mix of social
and affordable housing.
This matters. We’re supporting families
looking for a home to buy, young
people looking for a home to rent, and
vulnerable people looking for the home
that can change their life.
Our Housing Statement delivers more homes for Victorians
2 / Victoria’s Housing Statement – Progress update
Good decisions, made faster
9 Fast-tracking housing developments – almost 10,000 homes have been fast-tracked
for development over the last 12 months, including 1,638 homes through
the Development Facilitation Program.
9 Making it easier to build small second homes – we’ve eased regulations to allow
homeowners to build small second homes, such as granny flats, without needing
a planning permit.
9 Planning underway for 10 activity centres – we’re delivering 60,000 new homes
over time in 10 busy Activity Centres close to services, jobs, and public transport,
and we’re now consulting with local communities.
Cheaper housing, closer to where you work
9 $400 million investment in local infrastructure – we’ve committed $400 million
to upgrade roads, public transport, utilities, and community facilities in growing
outer suburbs.
9 Short Stay Levy – short stay accommodation like Airbnb and Stayz has reduced the
number of existing homes available for Victorians to live. The Short Stay Levy will unlock
real rental and unlock funding for social housing.
9 Unlocked surplus land for housing – we're unlocking surplus government land to deliver
9000 homes across 45 sites, close to jobs, community infrastructure, public transport.
9 A new inner-city community – the Arden precinct procurement process has been
launched, aiming to accommodate up to 20,000 new residents. Only 2 kms from
Melbourne’s CBD, Arden is on the doorstep of the new Metro Tunnel.
Protecting renter’s rights
9 Delivery of the Rental Stress Package – we have invested $7.8 million to help people
in-need stay in their homes.
9 Established a Renting Taskforce – our taskforce is cracking down on rental providers
and estate agents who do the wrong thing, such as renting out properties that don’t
meet minimum standards, false advertising, and not lodging bonds.
9 Rental Minimum Standards campaign – we delivered a state-wide campaign
on the minimum standards for rental properties so renters know their rights.
9 Rental Dispute Resolution Victoria – our Rental Dispute Resolution service will be
helping Victorians from 2025, allowing for matters between landlords and tenants
to be resolved quickly and fairly.
A snapshot of our progress
3 / Victoria’s Housing Statement – Progress update
More social housing
9 Big Housing Build – we are delivering more social and affordable housing for
Victorians with almost 10,000 homes under construction or completed. This year
alone, we’ve housed 691 victims of family violence.
9 Redeveloping Public Housing Towers – we are replacing outdated towers with modern
buildings that are safer, more efficient and more suitable for residents.
We’ve consulted with residents about their individual needs, and works are underway.
9 Regional Housing Fund – a $1 billion investment to build 1,300 new homes in regional
Victoria is taking shape, now that local communities and stakeholders have had their
say on the right housing mix and locations.
A long-term housing plan
9 Reforms for high-quality homes – we are protecting Victorians building or
renovating their homes. Before deposits are paid and insurance policies are issued,
the Victorian Building Authority will conduct audits and oversee practices to ensure
that high-quality homes are getting built.
9 A new Plan for Victoria – as part of a comprehensive, long-term plan for our state,
we released housing targets for every Victorian council so 70 per cent of new homes
go in established areas that are well-supported by transport, services and jobs.
9 Planning Regulation Reform – we’re conducting a full review of the state’s Planning
and Environment Act to cut red tape, streamline processes, and deliver better
planning regulations to get more homes built.
We acknowledge the Traditional Owners of Country throughout Victoria and pay our respect to them,
their culture, and their Elders past and present.
DPC93
State of Victoria, September 2024
This publication may be of assistance to you but the State of Victoria and its employees do not guarantee that the publication
is without flaw of any kind or is wholly appropriate for your particular purposes and therefore disclaims all liability for any error,
loss or other consequence which may arise from you relying on any information in this publication.
 For languages other than English, please call the Translating and Interpreting Service National hotline 131 450.
For an accessible version of this publication, visit vic.gov.au/housing-statement
Let’s do even more
The progress we’ve made in the last 12 months is significant.