r/melbourne


What are we actually doing about the housing crisis?
Politics
We've had a labor government federally for a while and state for an age. I'm just wondering what policies are on the horizon to solve the housing crisis? Any hope coming in the short / medium / long term?


shintemaster

The housing crisis is intergenerational and has been building for 2-3 decades now. I'd suggest primarily driven by LNP policy introduction, but in no way not actively supported by both major parties for the most part. It is not "fixable" without fundamental and significant change to our economy now which makes it painful - electorally and financially for the majority who will be hurt. No amount of house building policy can reasonably catch up now, the best option would be a multi decade plan to produce housing with federal backing including an entire pipeline of training and wage support to provide essentially life careers to people. It won't happen.

If I were a betting man I'd suggest the following:

- Both current major parties will be hoping it will magically go away (either via larger scale external or macro economic disaster also bringing down the value of housing or when they happen to not be in power)

- In the event of a genuine non-LNP coalition Government (ie. expanded Green / socialist presence being the balance for achieving Gov

Personally I think the only real solution that doesn't involve complete economic disaster would be a consolidated National / State approach that implements a multitude of small target policies all designed to support and feedback on each other:

- Housing targets with federally backed funding

- Short stay accommodation and tax changes to disincentivise vacancy significantly

- Escalating and staged removal of tax benefits to discourage housing as a capital investment in the longer term

- Immigration caps directly tied to housing and infrastructure delivery





EducationalGap3221
You're talking too much sense and naming strategies that would actually benefit the Australian people. I've sadly realized our Fed Govts are not here to serve us, but to serve themselves in some weird way. Yes, Albo & Penny Wong built bridges to repairing the relationship with China, but there's been nothing concrete done to address this H crisis... They can barely acknowledge how serious it really is, and they continue to pump indiscriminate immigration into the country.




TechnologyExpensive

agreed it's never going to happen. people need to act accordingly as it's only going to get harder.




Sk1rm1sh

I read on the NZ sub they did something pretty interesting:

Foreign owners had to build new houses instead of buying existing property if they wanted to own property.

Not sure on the exact details, I'm guessing they couldn't buy an old property and knock it down to put up a new one. Sounds like on the balance of things that increased housing stock at least.



Ceigey

That sounds great, largely because it’s investment that increases productivity, rather than investment that just increases scarcity.


j0n82

This and abolish negative gearing. Too many rich cunts buying up dozen of homes while enjoying tax cut on it? Frankly it’s bloody ridiculous 90% of ppl can’t afford one and that 10% of ppl are hoarding it while paying less tax. Can someone even tell me how negative gearing is helping anyone but the rich?



Zealous_Bend

Foreign investors are only able to buy new properties already. They can apply to the FIRB to buy an established property but it is not approved automatically.

Penalties for failing to conform include the forced sale of the property with the amount over the original purchase price being forfeited.


tax changes to disincentivise vacancy significantly

Escalating and staged removal of tax benefits to discourage housing as a capital investment

This is the core concepts that need to be uptaken.

Owning a property that's sitting empty and unused should absolutely cost money, not be a prudent investment. Tax concessions on investment property needs to go, income from property should not be eligible for tax deductions, and if we are really wanting to fix this, should be taxed higher.

Changes can be brought in over a number of years allowing people to step out, and more importantly preventing more people getting into holding multiple properties.


svoncrumb

I think you'll find both major parties hope you will stop talking about it as they don't plan on changing anything.


Qwazxc

500,000 people immigrated in last 12 months alone.

Excessive immigration is the problem, but if you disagree with it you are racist.




EXAngus

Look into YIMBY Melbourne.



burgerwitheverything


Awesome thanks!


neildiamondblazeit

Yes this. There's invested interests with political sway because they are organised. We need a 'first home buyer' political action group.





Unique-Job-1373

Unless immigration is slowed the housing crisis will continue




Rsj21

I cannot understand why this was downvoted. How can people legitimately not believe this is a major contributor to the crisis. Bewildering.




SikeShay

Because this is actually very wrong fundamentally lol. Yes immigration is putting pressure on the demand side, but we are an aging population with severe skills shortages, we'd be way more broadly fucked across the entire economy without them, ie plunge towards recession and long term depression.

What we need to focus on is fixing the massive and perverse supply side issues in housing, why has building approvals and construction rates halved since the 70s? We have over double the population, makes zero sense. With all these builders collapsing left, right and centre due to labour shortages and costs, we need to allow more migrants in for construction, it's absolutely fucked how much trades cost compared to anywhere else in the developed or developing world.



neildiamondblazeit

Well if you ask my parents they’ll tell you that a Dad on a single income with three kids was able to buy a house so why can’t you as a dual income couple? Stop spending your money on coffees.




Your Dad is an idiot. The time it takes to save for a home deposit has blown out to a record 11.4 years, while the national median dwelling now costs a record 8.5 times the median household income.




Allmightysplodge

The government has just put someone in charge of a department that oversees affordability/ Cost of living. That person owns 17 investment properties so that ought to tell you what our government really thinks about all this.

I think I'm am bout to start a company that manufactures pitchforks, gallows and guillotines... I suspect the lifetime of business will be short but sweet.



HeftyArgument
The property investors and homewowners are very pleased with the housing crisis, so don't you fucking dare suggest that it's a problem!






Cuppa-Tea-Biscuit

On an actual construction-related note, we really should have more acceptance of prefab housing stock at all levels of the market. In Australia it’s seem as being cheap and nasty because it was used mainly for those postwar housing commission houses and then for mining camps. It can really cut down the cost and time for construction, because you don’t need people on site for as long, and you don’t have as much time lost to bad weather.






JimtheSlug

We were given the opportunity in 2019 to address this and address climate change as well as ending offshore detention centres but the Australian public rejected it. It’s worth mentioning because successive federal governments have done nothing about for decades and introduced policies that have exacerbated it then problem will take a significant amount of time to be resolved.




u/asteroidorion avatar
asteroidorion

I hope you like nothing, because they tried that and they're all out of ideas





bucketsofpoo

They won't do anything

The construction industry needs employment.

The only way to do that is to build apartments for investors.

The developers are going to build the highest price apartments they can because of profits.

immigration will continue as to keep people renting the new apartments

your fucked basically

time to take the Timothy Leary approach and Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out.




preparetodobattle

Land tax is s going up to the point that some investment properties aren’t worth holding so that will bring some sites into the market



Zealous_Bend
How do you expect a problem that was decades in the making to be fixed in the space of less than two years?

The economic environment that has led to this shocking state of affairs is controlled by the federal government in the form of the FIRB, taxation policy and economic policy.



bradbull

Everyone knows the real answer, but they also know it's political suicide and won't happen.

Voters who already got theirs can't and won't give a flying fuck about what's good for those who don't. They are sitting pretty and it's not even their fault, it's the system which promoted housing as easily the best investment strategy this country has. Safe as houses.

I don't have the answers because I'm just not smart enough to and it's not my field, but my instinct says if they were able to at least change negative gearing policy to maybe just be applicable to 1 investment property per person/couple that might help a little? Any move to abolish it completely is a non-starter so I'm just thinking about what maybe could at least be a conversation. Would that just mean current multi-property owners would hike rents to cover their losses? Or could there be some kind of regulation to help stop that? I don't know. Like I said, I'm not smart enough to have all the answers here.. I'm just asking questions.



VLC31

Do you not actually read/watch/listen to the news? There is money being put into building more housing both by state & federal government (well Victorian Government, I don’t know about other states) however it is not something that is going to be solved overnight. Houses don’t just spring up, ready for habitation. They have to be built, there is a skills/labour shortage. There are rules being put in place about Air B&Bs, developers are being offered incentives to provide a certain amount of low cost housing. This isn’t a crisis that has just suddenly occurred, it’s been building up, probably over years.



IAMCRUNT

Red_Wolf_2

What are we actually doing about the housing crisis?

We're making it worse, that's what we're doing.




Willybrown93

Nothing. Most MP's are landlords and win when we lose.

Our entire political class will fight to the death to defend their right to charge us ever-increasing rent, and they have to be forcibly removed by the people for anything to ever change



Parking_Run3638

There's no such thing as a housing crisis in the same sense that there's no such thing as a cost of living crisis. Both of those things have been manifested by design to serve the interests of our political and financial ruling class.

It's why it's so comical that there are people who genuinely believe that the referendum had anything to do with 'wasting time when there were more important things to worry about'. Both of those things will very steadily get worse now, rather than better.



